---
title: 'Filters'
author: [Erik Hess]
categories: [ideas]
tags: [mood, health, preconceptions]
banner: filters.jpg
caption: [Internet Archive](https://flic.kr/p/odhVM7)
---

Sometimes I wonder about the filters that we place between reality and how we experience it.

I can be moody at times, and when I finally pull myself out of the funk, I realize that it's caused by a gap in personal maintenance. 

Lack of sleep can hit me hard, and the effects of sleep debt tend to build over time. Not enough healthy food, an excess of unhealthy food, or too little water can all make a big difference in my daily mood. Regular exercise is tough at first, feels great when I get into a routine, and is the first commitment I let go of when things get busy.

Whenever these sorts of personal maintenance tasks get out of whack, it's like I've put on a pair of tinted glasses. Something with me is wrong, but instead of realizing it I feel like something in the world is wrong. In my mind, there's something external that I have to fix.

I'm often tempted to try to improve things with caffeine or alcohol. In the long run, neither is a great solution. They just turn out to be another pair of tinted glasses to put over the ones I'm already wearing.

Beyond "simple" biochemistry, we're affected by all the habits and opinions we've built up for ourselves &ndash; good *and* bad &ndash; over the course of our lives. They just keep placing more and more tinted lenses right in front of the others.

Anyone who has played with colored filters and light sources knows that after a while it's hard for anything to shine through. We can be so used to squinting through these filters at the world that gets tough to know what things look like without an intermediary.

It's hard to figure out how a trap works from the inside. It can be even harder to figure out how to *open it* from the inside. We can't even try to remove the filters that cover our eyes if we don't realize they're on in the first place. 

I wish the solution was as simple as taking off a pair of glasses. Maybe the best place to start is by not putting them on in the first place.
