---
title: 'Trees'
author: [Erik Hess]
categories: [ideas]
tags: [trees]
banner: fallon-tree.jpg
caption: There's a cool lizard who does push-ups on that railroad tie.
---

I have a thing for trees. 

There's always been something great about sitting outside under a big tree on a breezy day. It seems inaccessible to me, an island of calm unaffected by the clamor of daily life.

There's a small memorial park just outside the base in Fallon that's unfailingly empty. It's a simple place&mdash;just a few picnic benches, a couple of clumps of trees, and a gravel parking lot. 

One of the big trees at the park grew a little ways from the others. When I'm spending the day in Fallon and get a moment free, I like to enjoy its shade while I read or write. I'm sitting there right now in fact&mdash;enjoying the  wind in the leaves, the cars wooshing by, and the occasional screams of a few dozen fighters as they depart overhead for the basin and range to the east.

{{ theme:partial src="image" class="right" title="My favorite tree in Key West" file="key-west-tree.jpg" }}

Another favorite tree lives by the Visitors Quarters in Key West. It grew in a grassy field by the water near a defunct  cul-de-sac, an old hangar, and some ancient ramps that haven't seen a seaplane in over a half-century. 

I used to Key West occasionally, and it was fun to hang out under that tree and read about philosophy, architecture, or art. I dug up a bunch of great second-hand titles in an out-of-the-way bookstore just off Duval Street. The seaside location seemed to demand more substantial topics, so who was I to argue?

Over the last few years, I've had fewer peaceful moments than ever, despite working from my own home for patient clients who live a continent away. For me, the challenge is the internet. It's practically everywhere now, so there are few barriers to checking email, Twitter, or news wherever and whenever I feel like it.

That's made quiet places like this one more precious than ever.  

In an age of ubiquitous connectivity, peace is found wherever we allow ourselves to find it&ndash;even if it's under the departure end of Runway 31&nbsp;Left, just beyond the gates of Naval Air Station Fallon, Nevada.