---
title: 'Toward an iOS-centric Static Blog Workflow'
subtitle: 'Part 1: The Challenge and the Starting Point'
author: [Erik Hess]
categories: [development]
tags: [ios workflow, ipad, sublime text, tmux, git, compass, sass]
banner: typewriter-air.jpg
caption: I still love this picture [University of Washington](https://flic.kr/p/87G2B1)
---

* **Part 1: The Challenge and the Starting Point**
* Part 2: Writing and Image Manipulation
* Part 3: Editing and Version Control
* Part 4: Review and Deployment
* Part 5: Maintenance and Conclusions

When I purchased an iPad Air 2 earlier this year, one of my goals was to see if I could wrangle a useable writing workflow out of the thing.

I know that many find the iPad a perfectly good platform for pretty much anything. That being said, my challenges with it in the past made me want to know if the problem was with the device, the software, my workflow, or just me. 

I had a hunch that all basic site maintenance and writing tasks were covered by popular, well-designed apps. My challenge would be combining those apps into a set of complementary, connected, simple steps that allowed the benefits of the iPad as a platform (ease-of-use, focus, connectivity, battery life) to outweigh its drawbacks. In the end, I was looking for an answer to the question: should I choose an iPad over a MacBook for everyday use?

Over the course of the next few articles I'll take you through my experiences as I try to use an iOS device rather than my laptop. Every article (including this one) will be written and published using only the tools available on iOS. 

For comfort I've created these posts almost exclusively on my iPad Air 2, using a ClamCase Pro keyboard. In principle, none of the tools I use should be severely compromised if used via the on-screen keyboard or on my tiny-screened iPhone 5s.

To start things off, let's take a look at the things I do to maintain our basic static(ish) blog. We happen to run [Statamic](http://statamic.com), which (as the name implies) isn't actually static. That being said, it shares same basic workflow with static engines &ndash; the tasks below should be common to any site that takes plain-text files (written mostly in Markdown) and turns them into blog posts for the world to see.

I see four logical groups:

* Writing and Image Manipulation
* Editing and Version Control
* Review and Deployment
* Basic Site Maintenance

We'll take a look at each set, and I'll briefly describe how I handle those tasks on my MacBook Pro.

### Writing and Image Manipulation

Creative work is the act of making something from scratch. In our case, that process begins with getting words down, and occasionally choosing then manipulating images.

{{ theme:partial src="image" class="right" title="Writing in Sublime Text is Pretty Nice" file="sublime-writing.png" }}

On the MacBook, my writing tool of choice is Sublime Text. I find something soothing and powerful about writing in a code editor, where the content rests on equal footing with the site's engine. I enjoy Sublime Text's plain-text approach to Markdown, its syntax highlighting, and even the line numbers. 

At a computer I almost exclusively tweak images in Photoshop. If I have to mark up an image with arrows or other annotations, I'll use Skitch if looks aren't more important than time, and Keynote in all other cases. I've tried more powerful tools like Illustrator for these kind of tasks, but they usually end up being more trouble than they're worth.

{{ theme:partial src="image" class="right" title="Developer Tools Can Be Helpful" file="chrome-writing.png" }}

### Editing and Version Control

My workflow lets me edit right in Sublime Text. Once I have a rough first draft in place, I'll save, then refresh and preview in my development browser of choice &ndash; Chrome, with the dev tools up on the right side. I can immediately see how the words look in their final font and styling, which (I think) allows me to more quickly find errors and fix them.

Unlike most static sites, Statamic doesn't require a compile step. I do use Sass and the command-line PHP server, though. To handle those tasks, I use a four-pane terminal workspace via `tmux` that looks like this:

{{ theme:partial src="image" class="right" title="Fun with tmux" file="tmux-writing.png" }}

The top-left pane has my local working terminal. I use it mostly for running `git` commands. The middle-left pane runs a local PHP dev server via:

`php -S localhost:8888`

That serves up the local version of our site in a web browser at `http://localhost:8888`. 

The bottom-left pane runs the `compass watch` command, which tells [Compass](http://compass-style.org) to recompile my [Sass](http://sass-lang.com) stylesheets in the event I tweak the site's layout or design (which I do, often). The big right pane is free for other uses, but often stays connected to our production server via `ssh`.

Version control is important for all applications, and that applies to blogs too. I use `git`, backed by [Github](http://github.com), which I interact with exclusively via command line. 

At critical save points I'll switch to iTerm and run through the following mantra:

```
git pull origin master
git add -A
git commit -m "Commit message"
git push origin master
```

That's a four-step process that grabs any changes that might have occurred on the remote server, adds any changes I've made locally, tags those local changes with a short message, then sends them back up to the remote server. 

Those four commands are all I ever do in `git`, unless something goes horribly wrong.

### Review and Deployment

At a certain point as a writer/developer, you've got to see how your post looks when it's live on the web. To do that, we've created a staging version of our website at http://draft.high90.com. It's set up to auto-pull every change we make to the core repository via [Github's post-commit hook](https://developer.github.com/webhooks/) That means every commit shows up a few seconds later on the staging site. Since it's hosted on [Webfaction](http://webfaction.com) just like our production site, this lets us preview on real-world hardware and gives us one last chance to fix any glitches before the new post goes live.

Once everything looks good I'll log in to the production site via `ssh` and manually deploy the updates using the following command, which by now should seem familiar:

````
git pull origin master
```

### Basic Site Maintenance

One advantage to my laptop-based workflow is that the writing process is identical to the maintenance process.

Occasionally I'll notice a glitch in the site while I'm working on a post and just fix it right then and there. Sometimes a post will require a new feature (like a sidebar or a caption) and I'll just add it.

This has the disadvantage of being distracting at times, but I consider it the a major strength of my current workflow. It's something I'm not sure I can easily replace.
