---
title: 'Why Publish'
author: [Bob VanderClay]
categories: [ideas]
tags: [writing]
banner:
caption: []()
---


This post started off titled "Why Write?", but that really wasn't interesting to me. I write all the time, and more importantly, I know why I write. Writing forces me to give shapes to my ideas and thoughts. Even when I can't put words to paper, I'll talk outloud to myself.

No, writing isn't a problem. What I'm not doing is *publishing*.

It's taken a lot of thought -- and many drafts -- to get here, a place where I can articulate the disconnect.

> “Language serves not only to express thought but to make possible thoughts which could not exist without it.”
> Bertrand Russell

It's not as simple as words giving form to my thoughts. It's bidirectional. Words don't just *give shape* to my thoughts, they *actually shape* them. Writing reprograms me. I am changed.

This presents a problem. Whatever challenge I was facing, no longer presents a problem. The changes to my mind won't even allow me to see the challenge in the first place. And why would I ever share such an obvious idea with the world?

The impossible, achieved, is no longer impossible. I can't help but feel that success somehow diminishes my accomplishments. That's an unproductive and dangerous direction of thought.

Fortunately, writing is not the only way to reprogram one's mind. Reading has the same effect. I am privileged to live in a time where it's never been easier for anyone to make themselves heard.

Every day I come across at least one article, story, or post that makes me think differently. Perhaps I might do the same.

And *that's* why I will publish.
